Any sufficiently advanced technology is indistinguishable from magic.
A friend, a sort of superhero in some sense, although I'm going to try to challenge you
on a couple of things in your theories and in your politics and so forth today.
I hope we'll have a wide-ranging conversation.
But Eric Weinstein, pleasure to welcome you onto the Into the Impossible podcast.
Brian, it's a total pleasure to be here and I appreciate your strategy to build them up first
for an initial dopamine hit and then tear them down later during the remainder of the podcast.
That's right. Well, I always say, you know, I got that from your mother and if you want,
I can get it from your mother-in-law, how to introduce you. But either way, I think you're
in good shape. So I had on my podcast a couple of weeks ago now, a certain mathematician and
that mathematician generated some controversy, as they would say, in his homeland.
And I want to just say that the mathematician's last name begins with a W. I won't say who it is,
but I want you to sort of opine on this and let me know your feelings, how you would react to it
if the W stood for, let's just say, Weinstein. So it said, mathematician W, it has been said
about his theory, is that it's not clear what his goals are. He says he wants the intention
and feedback of the physics community, but his unconventional approach, soliciting public comments
on exceedingly long results from perhaps long ago, almost endures and shall it remain obscure.
Mathematician W says he wants physicists respect. The ones consulted said gaining it would require
him to recognize and engage with the prior work of others in the scientific community.
So this is not written about Weinstein, just spoiler alert, it's written about somebody else,
another person I have great respect for, but I'm curious.
But who's not a mathematician?
Who is not a mathematician. Right.
Yeah. So what do you think about this? Is this something that you can abide by or
what's your feeling on those sort of sentiment expressed by the author in this quote?
Well, this is a very difficult question and a very interesting one.
What I've been opining on recently is that we have two communities that are behaving very strangely.
And one community is central to the institutional world of science.
And the other is outside of that world.
Now, traditionally in very difficult fields like physics, we assume that people who are working
outside of an institutional framework are cranks.
And there are reasons that that has been a good general bet.
I think that you'd have to say that it has almost always been correct,
at least with respect to fundamental physics.
But we've developed a new problem, which is you'd like to say that many of the core
research programs currently, let's say at the heart of theoretical physics,
are fringe. But how can you call something fringe if it's at the center of respectability?
Because fringe means two things. One, it means peripheral, which these things cannot be because
they lie at the heart of our institutional science and our institutional sense making.
But wacky, yes, they are. So when you have a wacky center and you have a wacky fringe,
you need different language. And so I've come up with the term knark for the wacky center,
which is cranks spelled backwards. So right now, the problem that you have is you have a very
difficult situation. The language is too impoverished to capture what is going on.
Most of the people who are wacky at the center of theoretical physics
are competent. That is, if the field suddenly knew what it was doing again.
And when I say theoretical physics, there's just one stupid gotcha way to get through. I mean
fundamental physics. I mean the kind of physics that you go to bookstores to read about to fill
your soul with wonder. Right. And that's the topic of this latest physicist who starts with a W
is project. I mean, Stephen Wolff. Figured it out. Skadoosh. So the situation is that
I think that if the Institute for Advanced Study were to get their hands on the next
great thing, they would instantly go back to being regular style physicists.
And I'm not positive that most of the crank community would do that.
In some sense, what's gone on in the center is that you have physicists who are like generals
who haven't fought a war in forever, but have been playing war games and have increasingly
come to believe that the war games that they're playing is actually the business of the general,
nor a soldier or a sergeant. And in fact, what they've been doing is playing with toy theories
that don't seem to really be attempting to do what they're supposed to be doing.
So nobody knows what to do with this circumstance. And having the old war about whether or not it
is better to be respectable and incremental versus wild wiggy out there and to take the
hit to one's reputation. That seems like a very poor choice of activities in which to
spend our energy. A real problem, which is that since the 1970s, we haven't had theory-led
breakthroughs in fundamental physics that would take anyone to Stockholm as a crude measure.
But nobody knows what to do, the fact that we're coming up on 50 years of being lost in the
wilderness in some sense. And some people choose to deny it. They say supersymmetry, guts,
and strings and theory loop on gravity are all promising. One should just calibrate one's
expectations. Other people are saying, what the hell are you talking about? We've never
been in a situation this dire. I do want to push back just slightly on that, Eric, because I did
consult with a friend who is a colleague here at UCSD for just a partial list. This was done in
response to Peter White, who I know is a friend of yours and Sabine Haasenthaler.
They're kind of claims, again, similar to what you're saying in the lack of the dearth of progress
in the last four decades. And here's an incomplete list that I got back when I asked,
what are some of the theoretical-led, driven, fundamental physics breakthroughs? Here's a list,
incomplete list, thermodynamics of information, quantum computing, inflation, conformal field
theory in two dimensions, conformal field theory in greater than two dimensions, modern,
effective field theory, heavy quarks, binary black holes, superconductivity, and then cosmology.
Again, we can sort of debate. I don't even think these are the most impressive things,
necessarily. I would have said that the theory of the determinant line bundle and the Quillen
connection, geometric quantization, the rigorous founding of quantum field theory around issues
of enhanced boredism. No, I didn't think that was a good list. So it's not, I don't mean to be rude,
but I'm not trying to make this stupid kill shot here against the community. I'm trying
that the community is fundamentally dishonest. It's a dishonest community now.
It lies about its achievements. It lies about its failures. So I think that what I'm doing is I'm
giving it its due. I'm saying that I don't think guts are dead, grand unified theories.
I don't even think supersymmetry is dead. I think that the field doesn't know how to explain
itself. The field doesn't know how to defend itself. It lashes out at anybody who dares to
contradict the official narrative, and it's enough. I mean, we're just all sick to death of listening
to David Gross and Ed Whitten tell us what's what because we don't believe them.
Well, I think there's this, you know, and you've spoken about this, you have,
you know, sort of a Nobel worthy level of pithy three-letter acronyms, some even more famous than
others. But one of them that I do cotton to is this idea of the gated institutional narrative.
And I saw this on display and, you know, again, we can edit out anything you don't like. But,
but, you know, there were people that that as soon as you posted your, I think, you know,
it was maybe provocative to post it on April Fool's Day. But but nevertheless, it was reacted to with
with great almost vitriol bordering, at least in some corners of the internet on almost like ad
hominem level attacks. And I experienced the same thing when I interviewed Steven Wolfram.
And I asked people, you know, do you not think these folks deserve a voice? I mean,
you cannot claim that Steven is not a brilliant mind. You may think he is arrogant or that he,
you know, tends to be self promotional, etc, etc. And even people were criticizing me for not asking
him about his employee relations. And I said, look, I'm not 60 minutes. I'm going to interview him.
I'm going to be respectful as I always am. I'm going to hear both sides. And if you don't like
it, you know, I'll give you your money back on the internet for the subscription costs. But I feel,
I want to know. And again, we don't have to talk about anything you don't feel like talking about.
But I feel like this narrative that is being proposed is sort of part of this like the first
reaction, which I think is a sign of sloppy thinking is I'll believe it when it's published.
Now, I've heard people say that about the most extravagantly, you know, hyperbolic claims. I've
heard people say that about ordinary claims. And it's sort of become a canard, a shibboleth. And
I wonder how you feel about that. I mean, after all, we're treating peer review as if a, it's
sacrosanct handed down from, you know, God or Muhammad on the mountain. Or if you like, that
it's been around in science as a useful vehicle. Of course, it has utility and can have utility.
But what do you make of the veneration of peer review, which, which as Stephen Wolfram has said
in connection to this, he said, I think it's corrupt. I think traditional route
is a giant story of somewhat corrupt gaming. I think it's some sort of inevitable that happens
with these very large systems. It's a pity. And I point out, you know, there wasn't peer review
for Galileo. There wasn't peer review for much of Newton and wasn't peer review
for Watson and Crick in 1953. That's right. So, but now I also get a similar level of,
you know, criticism for people that who do say legitimately, well, you get a lot of emails from
true cranks and true people that are seeking hyperbolic attention. So how do you manage the
gated narrative with having some value? I always say the hardest thing is for somebody to strike
a middle ground, not to be polarized. That's easy to be polarized. It's bogus. If it's not peer
reviewed, it's corrupt if it is. How do you strike a middle ground? Is there a value in the middle
ground? Oh, that's a lot. And these are important questions. If you really want to dig into it,
I'd be game. Yeah, please do. All right. So first of all, Stephen Wolfram is breaking the rules
and there's suspicion that he's breaking the rules because he doesn't have a theory of everything
and he's advertising it as if he does using PR and he's using the weight of his name
in part to make a splash. And a lot of people who feel that that is wrong to do, particularly as an
individual, take exception to that. And one can easily understand why they would take exception
to that because it's an end run around some kind of quality. Okay, so that is probably true.
The other thing is that it complicates the life of a working physicist to hear constantly,
you know, my friend has an uncle whose best friend thinks he solved the theory of everything
and he has a perpetual motion machine to prove it. Will you come back to his house in Peoria
and check it out? Nobody wants to lead a life like that. And I think that that's entirely
understandable. So I think we have to sort of, first of all, just demonstrate that we're not
confused about why people would have this in a working world. It wouldn't it be great to have
a nifty little shibboleth and discount everything that came in. So if all the cranks, you know,
used red crayon on napkins, and that's how they submit everything, then you have an idea of
who's a whack job and who's actually down. All right, now you have a different problem,
which is that you've got whack jobs inside of the leading institutions who have been part of
whack job programs. And the whack job programs have whack job journalists inside of the whack job
leading papers. So if I open up the science times for years, there were these breathless
stories about how M Theory was going to give me better toast, clean my fingernails and give me
the theory of everything in short order. What happened to that? Well, those are institutional
canarks. And the problem is that the canarks really dislike the cranks. And the cranks are
trying to avoid the canarks. Now, first of all, you should know that I am not aware of the vitriol
that you're talking about from the professional community aimed at me. I'm aware of it towards
Stephen Wolfram. And I have been told that there are certain reddits that got shut down,
very personal, very unpleasant. And first of all, you have to remember that the field has a lot to
be embarrassed about. I've published essays in edge.org, critical of the String M Theory program,
particularly some of the nastiest things that they have ever done. I mean, it's just, it's so
bad, it is funny. One of the things, I forget whether David, whether Joe Polchinski maybe was
credited with this, but there was the claim that if anybody comes up with anything that isn't
String Theory, we'll just incorporate it into the String Theory program and say it is. So it's
like, oh, wow, does that have the locals play? Great to know. You know, there's this sort of,
when nobody's got a theory of quantum gravity, you have loop quantum gravity and String Theory
buying to be the leading non theory of non quantum gravity, because neither of them seem to work.
All of this leads to complete disarray. And of course, all that people have to fight over is
prestige that's left over, you know, from the feast that was served by Dirac and Einstein
and company, Feynman. And now their descendants are chewing over the bones that were thrown in
the scrap heap, and it's pretty slim pickets. So of course, people are going to be nasty.
I think that you have to expect that they're going to be nasty. And I think that you also
have to be sympathetic, which is that if you're slaving away on a tiny fragment of a long ago
abandoned program, because that's what you did your dissertation, and then you happen to have
an office somewhere in the dot edu ecosystem, you're pretty pissed off that a guy like Stephen
Wolfer, who might be, you know, pulling around flying private, you know, is hiring his own
armada PR agent, and creating a splash. So I think it's, I think envy, the invidious nature of this,
the palpable sense of failure, the sense that he doesn't really have a theory of everything,
etc. This animates people and it should animate people. And there are sensible questions like
why is it that people who come from outside the community only work on the theory of everything?
Why don't they work on adding a couple of extra digits of precision to some QCD calculator?
Right. Or, you know, revisiting or trying to prove ultimate was wrong.
Whatever. I mean, you know, it's always Einstein was wrong. And here's why I always feel like it's,
you know, it's like Dungeons and Dragons, they think they're going to get, you know,
Einstein sort of. It's so funny, because like the one thing that I really never want to do
is I don't want to damage Einstein. I feel like we're so blessed that he came through this way,
like the trying to go after him because you want to teams really perverse.
So let's get into, you know, your approach to I want to make sure that we settle that because
people are going to focus on on this segment if they focus on this at all. I've built a fairly
large platform from talking about things other than physics predominant. And I'm not a physicist,
you know, people always say physicist Eric Weiss and I almost always correct
to be really quite good about saying, Hey, I'm not part of your professional game. I'm not
taking your professional resources. I'm not dirty, pristine archive, hep, hep, ph,
you know, preprint server. And they're still pissed off. They're still angry. And they're angry
because of hubris. You know, it takes a ridiculous sense of self possession and delusion
to think that you're going to make progress in the field that is probably the hardest field of
human endeavor that's been stuck for the longest time on the hardest problem. So I'm weirdly sympathetic
to these momsers. I don't know what you want to call them. They're very pleasant people.
I wish that they would, you know, I don't know, weed is legal. They should probably smoke a joint
chill out and actually think about whether this really represents where they want to be in their
lives, shouting at people after such a dearth of results or decades. Well, you know, my tag line
is always, you know, I love astronomy. I love physics because it's not like in astronomy,
there's a Republican constellation over there and there's a democratic comment over there. It
should be like a political free zone and not necessarily a safe space where, you know, ideas
can't be challenged. And, you know, part of what I respect about people like you, like Wolfram,
is that you're willing to come on and, you know, I'm not a pushover to just accept everything
that he or you would have to say. And yet I feel like it's extremely valuable. And I'm not just,
I would say this about anybody who's, of course, you have to get over some gate to use the Weinsteinian
expression. But at the same time, because there's only so much time in the day, let's be honest,
I only have so much time to do the actual work I get paid to do by the state of California and
also explore other things and do other projects. I think, A, there is a jealousy, there is a sense
of jealousy. But B, I do think there is validity to people that say, look, these people are bypassing
our traditional, time-tested modalities of going at and attacking scientific, scientific nature.
And, and then this guy who's very eloquent and very deep goes on Joe Rogan and he just blasts away
and he'll get more attention, you know, than the exponent of my H index. And I think that, that
there is a balance there. I can love to take this issue with that if you don't mind.
Yeah, let's go for it. Let's talk, the H index, by the way, originates here at UCSD by my colleague
Jorge Hirsch. And I tease him about that because his highest cited paper is actually about the H
index. And I hope to have him on the podcast that sometimes talk about attribution and credit.
First of all, one of the things that's interesting about the H index, if you think about it,
maybe you could apply it to Curt Goodell or somebody who published nothing.
Right, yeah, exactly.
Right. And so I partially have an aspiration if I'm going to have any impact on physics whatsoever,
God willing, I would love to do it with like an H index of zero or undefined in order to
destroy the H index because it's a proxy and people get very carried away with showing you
how much hard work they've done in a cargo cult that the general is nonproductive. So
it's a pretty bad proxy when it becomes circular. With respect to Joe Rogan, first of all,
your community has a huge problem. I can't tell you how bored most of us are hearing about the
multiverse or many worlds or entanglement. We're going to talk about all those, by the way,
but go ahead. Double slit experiment. It's not that they're not interesting. It's not that they're
not fascinating. It's not that they're not confusing and perplexing and deep and all these
things, but we've heard it 12,000 times before. And whether Sean Carroll has a new wrinkle on the
multiverse or not is irrelevant. The part of the problem is that you guys haven't even pushed out
the Dirac equation. People really know who Dirac is. They don't really know how to spell the word
spinner. They don't understand the hop vibration can be visualized. So with all due respect to
the community, you failed. You guys have just, you're terrible. And when I think there's something
sexy, actually, I want to go on Joe Rogan and I push out the hop vibration. Even if I don't
explain it, if I just show people, here is a principle fiber bond. This is the kind of object
on which gauge is taking. I've got artists all over the world trying to depict the basic structure
so that people can see rather than Lawrence Krauss going on Joe Rogan and giving some analogy that
is supposed to be about what gauge theory is. I'm trying to go on Joe Rogan and say, look, you know,
the Penrose stairs, what if that is actually the depiction of horizontal subspaces defining a
connection in some sense and what you're looking at is hollownam. I'm starting to get the right words
into the hands of dangerous children of the internet who may not have access to Princeton,
Stanford, or Harvard, or MIT, or Oxford, or Cambridge. No, I think that is valuable.
But like with a little bit of self-righteous self-judication,
match me. Instead of coming on and one more time telling me the same sort of mind-numbing stuff
that the article seems to go through both slits. Really? It's a way, dammit. Can you please just
explain this thing properly? Just get to the point where you're talking about her mission
operators and eigenvectors and eigenvalues rather than all this mumbo jumbo speak. And if you don't
mind, yes, I'm going to show them pictures that they've never seen before that you should have
been showing them. And so the fact that you didn't do your job, don't come after me blaming me.
Join me, beat me. Yeah, I think that that's some of the most valuable service. I know it's not
necessarily intentional. Maybe it is. I mean, knowing you, it could be intentional. That
controversy sheds sometimes too much heat, but it does bring light to these obscure topics. And
other guests that I've had on, and Joe always takes the best of my guests. I've had on Sean Carroll,
I've had on Stephen Wolfram, and I've had on Roger Penrose, and I know you've had on him as well.
And he's another person. And it's like, you know, what do you have to say about him? Of course,
he doesn't go on Joe Rogan for a time. The guy's 82 or something years old. He's not going there to
bolster his social, you know, his social hits. He's going on there because he's passionately curious
about extrapolating from the ivory tower where we both inhabit, although I believe less so in the
case of an experimentalist. And I do want to get to that. But he is, you know, bringing to mind
the same concept, Escher's, you know, infinite hyperbolic space projection, things that, yeah,
what if there is some young kid who instead of being who, let's just say she can have the choice,
she can look at the double slit experiment. That's wonderful. But yeah, what about looking at
projective, you know, spaces? What about these conformal transformations? I think there is,
and that he was the first science writer that I ever read popular science writer as a 17 or 18
year old. I didn't understand much of what he was saying. And if there was a Joe Rogan back then,
maybe it would have turned me on even more. And maybe I would have, you know, had a better career
as a theorist, although I doubt it. Maybe, but you know, I guess what my take is going to be is that
if I'm talking about the Wu Yang dictionary, and most physicists don't even think about the Wu
Yang dictionary, and these are the pivotal moments in your life, you know, I'm not taking a ton of
flack for saying wrong things. Sometimes people say, well, that wasn't a complete explanation.
Well, no kidding. You know, my last one went out to, I think it's now at 6.1 million people.
I mean, even for Joe Rogan, that's pretty large. Yeah, I think it is principal bundles out at scale,
so that I'm accosted in airports. What with people saying, I didn't understand there's,
there's a, there's a U1 vibration and an SU vibration. You're damn straight. I'm doing your PR
for you. You guys can't even figure out how to get enough dollars into your field to keep you
guys solvent. And despite the fact that I'm huge critic, I'm a huge critic of how you guys run your
shop, you don't mind. I'm going to try to get you some funding, some visibility, and I'd appreciate
it. Shut up. Thanks. Yeah, I think there is a lot of validity to that, Eric. I feel the same way
about Wolfram, and it would be interesting to get your, have Wolfram on your show at some point,
because I think, you know, these, or maybe I could host both of you at the same time,
because I think there is a value in, and I see a parallel between what he does and what you do,
and in your life's mission, at least in the geometric unity project. And it comes down to,
you know, kind of this classic description of what, you know, I think Einstein or somebody else
used to say is, is like wood and marble, you know, the kind of operational, quantized, you know,
computational world of physics and the pure geometric, you know, irreducible fundamental
side of the wood and marble, the wood is, is the stress energy tensor. Yes. But I would say,
actually, it's steel, because it should be manmade or human made, right? It shouldn't be wood as
naturally occurring and marbles naturally. I don't speak German, the original quote is in German,
and I think it's cheap wood, and sometimes it's even translated as balsa. I think it is. My concern
is that the real problem, of course, is in the marble, assume that the problem is in the wood.
Yeah. So let's, let's turn to that now. Just today, I heard a wonderful, read a wonderful piece,
not that I agree with it necessarily, but in Quanta Magazine, which is doing wonderful kind of
popularization of very complex mathematical and technical, you know, cosmological, etc.,
the hottest topics sort of in the field and has great writers to boot. And there's a piece today
that says what goes on inside of a proton. The quark math is still in conflict with experiments,
and they go through and they show, you know, these beautiful animations of a quark glue on plasma,
and they talk about this million-dollar math prize awaits anyone who can solve this type of
equation using QCD to show how massive entities like protons form. And I'm thinking like what
percentage of people are going to understand it, even in the physics community, as you point out,
I'm, I'm a physicist. Or in the math community. That's a part of the math gap, right? Luckily,
for me, I had Robert Brandenburger and Jerry Garelnik as, you know, cosmology and group theory
teachers. And I learned a great deal from them and from my colleague, Stefan Alexander,
I mean, your mutual friend, who is incredibly creative and productive. Otherwise, I wouldn't
have learned about it. I mean, I can go, I went basically my whole education without being required
to learn about group theory. And arguably, does it come into play when I'm building a microwave
radiometer for use at 17,000 feet above sea level? No, it doesn't. But at the same time,
it's the reason I got into physics in the first place. And so what I want to kind of just
toss around with you is on the experimental side, because I think we see things, you know,
hammer theory, we see everything like it's our own personal hammer, you're obviously coming
mathematically. But it gives you great visibility into, you know, I always say like, if I go like
this, you know, I have a problem, but I don't know, I have a problem. I'm covering my eye for
people that are listening on the on the audio version of the podcast. And I think getting a
perspective from outside, there are things that really hit a nerve when we talk about things,
especially things that may be untestable. And, and for example, the multiverse, I personally
have a lot of issues with the multiverse. And I know people celebrate, I actually asked Sean
Carroll, this branch, you have a lot of issues. Yeah, exactly. Right. I asked Sean Carroll,
you know, what would you say is the, you know, is the likelihood that the multiverse is true?
And he said 50%. And I asked him, well, what's the likelihood that God is true? He said less than
1%. He wouldn't say zero. He's, he's, he's certainly, you know, very, very knowledgeable
about how to ascribe his, his priors. But on the other hand, I think, yes, when you get into
these descriptions, of course, it's not, and I don't want to go through geometric unity,
except to ask you if we can post the PowerPoint in the show notes that you showed after your
April Fool's Day podcast, because I think, you know, people are leaping and saying, well,
you know, in 2013, you promised there was an archive paper coming and, you know, I look for
it. I don't see it. But would it be possible to post the PowerPoint that you use just for the
people? Because I don't want to go through it. You've gone through it with Joe. You've gone through
with Lex Friedman. But first of all, I mean, you can screenshot the PowerPoint. I can come up with
the PowerPoint. I get very innervated by this talk. Community is really badly behaved. And my
feeling is you don't really, I don't think you really care that much about the PowerPoint. Most
people in the community who have this kind of like paper or didn't happen, this kind of attitude.
This is shorthand for please just, just say a Lagrangian so we can go through it and invalidate
you. That's really the energy. The gain of institutional Lagrangian. Well, no. The point
being that a Lagrangian is a very clear and clean way of saying what a theory is. And there's
a fascination in the community, which is, well, if you think you've got this whole thing, why don't
you put your pen down and tell us what it is? And I'm not even necessarily that scared of that.
That's not the issue. The issue is you guys just aren't honest about where you're really at. You're
irritated. You're pissed off. And you're pissed off partially at me, but you're pissed off largely
at yourselves. And everybody knows it. And one of the reasons that I don't have a ton of fear
is that I don't have somebody else regulating my oxygen in the community.
So the issue of what a theory is, how to milk it for information, a lot of this was dealt with very
well in Duroc's 1963 Scientific American article, deserves to be very widely read, even though
our audience, he's somewhat used Schrodinger as his stocking horse, where he talked about
Schrodinger's failure to agree with experiment. And the issue is that apparently the Schrodinger
hadn't taken into consideration certain aspects of spin. So this has to do with what I would call
the suitmaker and the tailor. If you have a kind of a weird way of paying for things,
where whoever discovers the island doesn't get the island named after them, but whoever
climbs to the top of the highest summit on the island and puts a flag there, that's the name
of the island. So the guy who's spending his time tying up the boat at the dock gets beaten
by the guy who races to the summit. Okay, well, that's a pretty innervating thing, or like you
pay for the last leg of the relay different than who did the best time in the relay race.
You saw this with, for example, the Poincare conjecture in mathematics,
where somebody's building on several large steps, but it's a pro-man solution to the conjecture.
So you've got all these sort of issues of the political economy of physics and mathematics,
and, you know, this is what causes people to get really pissed off, because Dorak's point was
Schrodinger came up with the suit, but until the tailoring is done, you don't know whether it fits
the patient, which is experiment or, you know, the client. And so this is sort of the problem,
which is why do you want to deliver a suit to somebody who's going to claim that the tailor
made the suit when they do the last alteration? And I think that this is part of the problem with
copper, at least the naive application of copper, and people have to realize there's a price for
playing all of these incredibly innervating games with credit and pretending that nobody cares about
credit and that everybody behind the scene stabs each other. Being outside of the system, I've
never seen such a group of completely hypocritical people who all seem to only want to serve nature,
God, and Jesus, but on the other hand, what they really seem to do is behind the scenes demand
that they get proper credit, proper citations. You know, and just another quick point.
When Juan Maldesena won his breakthrough prize, he had to explain what he'd been up to, and he
was talking about gauge theory, and he had to illustrate it, and he chose to illustrate it
with the economics of exchange rates, which actually came out of work that my wife did at
Harvard. It happened that he didn't credit my wife's dissertation where some of this work appeared.
He knew about the, you know, and when I ran into him in San Francisco, he changed that. He also
diluted this a little bit by quoting some irrelevant work. So, you know, my feeling about this is
the community also has a huge problem not acknowledging people that it doesn't think are
going to show up at the next conference. You sort of know who all the regulars are, and you play with
them using the game theory. So, you would attribute outside of the community. Very often, the citation
games don't work. The credit games don't work because we don't have a credible threat. And one
of the nice things about having a relatively large podcast and access to some of the largest
platforms in the world is the community hasn't really quite figured out that you're not necessarily
going to see me at your conference if you don't invite me. But if you don't credit my work and
you start to, you know, talk about it, you are going to have a problem with repeated games. I
think the academic game works best when you have repeated games. And part of the problem with why
people take on cranky affectations when they don't start off as cranks is that they come to understand
that the system doesn't work as advertised. But if you want to get into the substance of what these
theories are, that would be fun too, not just talking around them, but talking about.
Yeah, I do want to talk about that. But just to circle back, you know, I mean,
you, it seems to be common for, you know, one of two different approaches. You can attribute
malice or incompetence. Now, it's hard to believe that, you know, Juan would be incompetent because
he is brilliant. So I guess, you know, if that's your only alternative to attribute something
malicious, that is, you know, that that's certainly your right. It's, it's a, it's a behavior pattern.
Look, I love Isadora Singer, who's been a dear friend of mine in the past. But he would forget
when he heard something from me, because I wasn't somehow properly in the right place in his
consciousness. We see this with women very often in meetings where they'll say something five minutes
later, a man will say more or less the same thing and everybody will say, ah, Jim's done it again.
Right. Matilda effect. Right. Call this he peating. Right. There's something called the Matthew effect
to hit. Matilda effect. Right. Yeah. And then there's the Matilda effect. So all of these things
have to do with the way in which our social brains compute how we wish to be diluted going
forward, who we wish to acknowledge. And we make an implicit calculation. Am I likely to see this
person tomorrow or not? Right. Yeah, I do look at it. I'm just here to remind people. It got more
expensive. Certainly, it is true that, that you have a prominence, which I think is unquestionably
earned that you've, you have developed a personality and a unique modality of thinking. You're also
incredibly courageous, which is one of the rarest of all traits. I don't think you really give
a figure, I'll say, because it's a PG conversation. On the other hand, I look at you and I see
these kind of a different image of a lot of my colleagues who are very dear. They kind of remind
me of these fiddler crabs that you see at the beach here in San Diego. They're incredibly well
developed on one side of their shell. And the other side is this puny little digit. But you
don't see them going around, you know, and kind of like berating the other crabs that have two
equally sized, you know, protuberances or whatever you call claws. And that it's kind of, it's puzzling
to me, because you see it for people like Mildegras Tyson, who is not, you know, an active scientist
or Bill Nye, who is an engineer by training, and they're outstanding communicators. And yet,
there's some of the largest targets of jealousy. It just seems strange. It's like me criticizing
the conductor of an orchestra for being, you know, getting attention during this.
Let me take my opponent's view as steel-mannered slightly. In part, it has to do with how much
deference and fairness these people give to the community that they are implicitly mining. So I
think everybody knows that they in some sense benefit from Mildegras Tyson's popularity.
You know, Brian Green is potentially kind of a more interesting version of this because
he's got great comic timing. Oh boy, that guy would have been fantastic in Vaudeville.
On the other hand, he's a straight up geometric gangster, you know, he can hang with the best of
them. I think that in the case of Bill Nye, the sort of the sense is, how did a guy with a bow tie
come to speak for the rest of us who are doing research? And so I think that there's, there are
healthy tension. I think one of the points that I keep trying to make is I'm not speaking
for the community as their voice. Like I may be pissed, but I also think, you know, I think I've
been very clear that the theoretical physics community is the intellectual version of SEAL Team
6 and our underfunding of theoretical physics is a tragedy. And it's in part what causes the
community to be unspeakably beastly to, to not only each other, but to outsiders.
Right. They're fighting over the crimes of the scrums of this cookie that's shriveling up.
Well, you guys need more money. You've struck the world's worst licensing deal. Somebody's
got to defend the theoretical physics community because you're not allowed to license what you've
contributed to the world. And therefore you can't, you know, if everybody had to pay for every
semiconductor instruction or every URL, every email ever sent, or every, every, all the protection
that came from the hydrogen bombs and lives that were saved to America by being able to end
whatever it is. It's enormous. It's enormous. The theoretical physics community should never
have to beg for another dime. But they should. The ought from is though, Eric, how do you actually,
what are you going to, are we going to apply a tax point? You call them taxpayer dollars. I'm not
a physicist. Those are $5 for the most part, the extent to which the modern economy is built on
physics, whether it's communications or computation or protection or chemistry or whatever.
Let's be clear. They're physics dollars. And we had a licensing deal and you guys
welched, you, the general public welched, taxpayer welched, don't bug me about your taxpayer dollars.
You guys are the beneficiaries of the best deal in history. Shut up, fund the theoretical physics
community. Yes, they're horrible. Yes, they're failing. Not doing their job. Yes, they're lying
to you. Start paying them. They will be much better. They'll still not be perfect. They're arrogant
because they're the reason for the arrogance. I don't hear anyone else saying anything remotely
like what I'm saying. And I try to be fair just like with Juan. I settled up our differences.
I'm not saying that I'm pissed at him. I am saying that it's a very common behavior pattern. I've
had the same issue with John Baez over the Actonians. Again, I can settle my differences,
but I'm just telling you that from the outside, it's very strange that when I go to a gathering,
I come in as a Harvard PhD. I'm treated one way, but if I come in as an employee of Peter Teal,
I'm treated as the dumb money that has to be convinced that we should throw it at the community
because community is doing the most mind blowing stuff of all time. When I start talking technically,
you see people have this feeling like, wow, you're not supposed to be able to do that.
Right. And then you go through this phase transition and break out the hop vibration.
I want to ask you, does this not result naturally as the evolutionary culmination of what I call
the academic hunger games? I mean, you start off and get into the best college. You need to do
all sorts of activities and get good grades and take good tests and so forth. Then you go to
college and you're competing in the physical sciences. Let's just say you're going to be a
theoretical physicist. You're competing with some of the brightest minds who have ever lived in your
peer group. You got to outlast them to get a good PhD slot. Then you got to shine as a PhD student,
get the attention of your advisor. Then you got to get a good letter of recommendation and a job
offer, a prestigious postdoc. Then you got to get a good, it's just a minor. It's gotten so much
worse since 20 years ago when I went through the final rung in this ladder. Yeah, go ahead.
We have to stop this. How do you stop it? How do you undo a 1,000-year-old tradition?
This is not a 1,000-year-old tradition. This has to do with Vannevar Bush, the endless frontier,
the expansion of the post-secondary education system. I think I was hanging out with the provost
at UCSD and he didn't even understand the effect of the Eilberg Amendment of 1976 by Dole in 1980,
the fraudulent NSF and NAS projections of a looming shortage that opened the floodgates
foreign labor universities, the misclassification, the student apprenticeship. There's an entire
recent horrible history of turning the modern professor into a surf, not just the graduate
student into a surf, but attempt to destroy academic freedom. If you cannot tell people to
screw off and know that you are still funded the next day and you can still come into your office,
the field is lost. Yeah, but I mean, so I do want to talk about, let's just go there now,
academic freedom. Is it still valuable? Is it still necessary? I make the claim that in my field
in experimental physics, until COVID-19, which I do want to pick your brains on, until COVID-19,
I had 100% employment rate for all my PhDs and my undergraduates. This 14 people as of yesterday
have become a PhD, they've gone out to professorships, prestigious post-docs and so forth. So there's
no gating up until that point that's certainly a seller's market, jobseeker's market up until this
level. I don't know exactly in the same sense in the theoretical market, although I have very
many friends, but they take fewer students and so it's a little bit normalized in that sense. But
in terms of academia and freedom, I mean, I could say whatever I want, but I could also,
even if I didn't have tenure, I could say, you know, I could say whatever I want also and go and
get a job in industry or go and get a job in finance. Not to diminish it, not to diminish it,
or sorry, just not to diminish it, but just saying that I have a valuable set of Liam Neeson-like
skills that I convey to my students that are very flexible. And I know that's true of theorists as
well. So to what extent does a professor of physics need to be tenured and guaranteed fiefdom for life
arguing against my own interests? But you know, or let's go sociology. Very important. Yeah, go ahead.
It's very important. This is the replacement of FU money. And it's not just about whether you have a
job. There's all sorts of ways to turn up the heat on a professor. You can put them in a shitty
office. You can give them a huge teaching load. You can humiliate them. There are all sorts of
ways to fire people who can't be fired. So there's no joke. Unfortunately, I've lived long enough
that it's no longer relevant, which is what's the difference between free speech under the Soviet
and American Constitution? And the answer is that the Soviet Constitution gives you the right to
say anything and protest your government, but the American Constitution guarantees your freedom
the day after. So the key question is, can you tell your field to screw off and still get grants?
That's a question. Can you tell your department chair that they're out of line trying to force
you to sign a diversity and inclusion of which you should, you know, tremble reverently with your
pen in hand to sign, know that when you don't sign, you're going to be fine. So I think that
partially the problem is also that you cannot say that giving academic freedom to people who
will never use it. If you overvet and you make sure that the people who get academic freedom are
the people you can trust never to need it, that all of these things don't work. The key issue is
you need dangerous, safe people. Dangerous by virtue of the fact that they can say everything
that needs to be said safe and that they're not going to abuse it to say things that shouldn't
and needn't be said. And if you can't have dangerous, safe people knowing that they're
going to be fine the day after they said what needed to be said that pissed everybody off,
but woke everybody up, then it's not academic freedom.
Do you really feel like that could happen if I criticize Ed Whitten? Am I going to get my
tenure shift or my teaching assignment at UCSD, you know, greatly enhanced, punished in that way?
Well, I'm not saying that there's a direct transmission mechanism. I didn't know that
you and Ed Whitten were in the same game. But I'll say that Ed Whitten is perhaps the finest,
you know, mathematician of our time, but that his leadership of the theoretical
physics community has been arguably disastrous and that he earned effectively as a
geometer and spent as a string theorist. That's a very dangerous statement if I was in fact at,
let's say, the Center for Theoretical Physics at MIT. And, you know, I feel about Ed Whitten the
way people sometimes feel about Voldemort, which is that you want to be very carefully saying
his name at this advanced age of my life. He's one of the few people that I find absolutely
terrifying. And that's not politically, just intellectually. The neurons on that guy just,
I've never seen anything like it. Yeah, I mean, just recently he came up with a way to test for a
black hole in the outer solar system. So now he is venturing into my turf. He's, he's gotten into
astrophysics. So I could be, I could theoretically be endangered, I suppose. Well, but I'm just
trying to say that part of the problem was I didn't care people after David Gross, David Gross,
who again, you know, fabulous physicist and one really the seminal figure to cross over
from the, you know, last major improvements in the standard model into the world of strings and
beyond. You know, he gave these talks year after year to sort of say where the theoretical physics
community was going. And there wasn't enough ability to say, are we going over a cliff?
Is this, is this crazy? Is this insane? I mean, what, what are we doing people?
Like that voice was silenced because people were terrified. I would hear people say, well,
I'm so glad you said something, but I could never say something. And I really disliked it.
So I mean, what way of incentivizing is there a market, you know, mode of, of operating?
Guys need more money. But I mean, I, I agree. I'm not going to turn down more money. And,
you know, ever since the Phoenicians, no, no, it's super important that you guys have a guarantee
universal physics income. Ralph, Ralph, Ralph Gomery of the Sloan Foundation said this thing to
me. He said, the bargain was always that you weren't going to get super rich as a professor,
but you would have the freedom that came from your job. And that's how we got great people.
When we lost the freedom, we stopped being able to compete effectively for the top people.
And so my version of this is you need the freedom of a billionaire without the wealth.
We have had, you know, and this is a huge shift in science funding, arguably, I mean,
the last, you know, 10 years has been some of the biggest struggles in
my career to get funding from federal sources and some of the most successful to get it from
private foundations, because I think there is sort of a freedom that comes with the private
foundation. And yeah, you can talk about the FU capital that they can supply. But on the other
hand, they also have priorities that may not align with the priorities of the entire nation,
right? So, so I wonder, you know, if you're talking to, you know, somebody who like Jim
Simons, who's been criticized for merely pursuing his own intellectual interests, I don't think
that's fair. It's like a guy's working on a cure for autism, you know, by what standard?
Jim Simons isn't all around fantastic. Yeah, he's a unique human being. A unique human being.
But Jim Simons has the correct instincts. There's nothing more important, in my opinion,
for the preservation of humanity than theoretical physics.
Yeah, you think it's actually culturally relevant to the survival of a society? If so,
how did we do without it, you know, until the 1940s or so in 1930s?
Well, I don't agree with that. I mean, my feeling about this is, first of all, that
it's necessary for the survival of humanity for a couple of different reasons, which have to be
pulled apart. The first of which is theoretical physics is unique in the sense that it somehow
trains the pure mental facility and the gritty mental facility to work together like nothing
else we've ever discovered. I'm not saying it's not possible to duplicate it again,
but even relative to mathematicians who I could make an argument might even be smarter in a certain
kind of technical sense. The power of the hybrid vigor of pure cleanliness and pure grit
produced something where we never knew that the human mind was capable of those flights,
as we've seen in theoretical physics. So I really believe that if you wanted to talk about, you know,
the gym that trains bodies to be at their peak, well, for the mind, that's theoretical physics,
fundamental physics at best. It's a dojo. All right. It's the dojo. And the idea that you get,
like, I'm going to say this the horrible way, if China was smart, they go and buy the Institute
for Advanced Study. They just buy out all those guys. They're like, what, five guys who are just
all of them unbelievable, whatever my issues are? I mean, people are like, I don't understand,
are you for Ed Whitton? Are you against him? Well, I have a complicated relationship with
these guys. Right. If I were China, I would pay each of those guys $10 million a year
to have a deal. And the fact that we wouldn't bid that up is because we're idiots, right? So
you want the world's smartest people happy and at your beck and call. And maybe you call them up
once every 25 years. It's a bargain. Shut up. Pay it. It's their money anyway. There's two
grandfathers and grandmothers created it. So if you look at it, and I agree with you that physics,
I broaden it to experiment because I think the best experimental physicist should know
the most about theory. Actually, we are encumbered. I was going to get to that. Yeah. Okay, go ahead.
Take it away. So CERN is the most obvious, but then there are like high precision experiments.
There's all the amazing stuff doing at the South Pole. There's the fact that LIGO can pick up these
faint. There's an analog in the experimental end of this, which is look at what we've done.
This is the reason that you put computers, you know, to their limits, engineering,
tolerances, creativity. All of this stuff is hugely valuable any time you want to convert it to
something else. But people want to do the sexiest stuff when they're not being tasked for practical
stuff. The Manhattan Project was an engineering project. It wasn't really a theoretical physics
project. It did have a positive effect. If you look at the Shelter Island conference,
clearly these guys were not suffering from the same level of learned helplessness that the
Dirac's quantum electrodynamics had induced before renormalization taught us how to extract
measurable predictions. But in all of these things, the key issue is the first aspect of
why you find theoretical physics is that you want to know that you can call up the world's smartest
people whenever you need them to solve your analytic problems that have grit and indeterminacy
in them. And there's an absolute parallel on the experimental side. The second thing
is that we learned just over 100 years ago that we've got fundamental limitations on visiting
rights to the universe. And I can't stand to constantly hear that Elon wants to go to Mars
to save the world because the Mars, the moon, Titan, and Celadus. There's just not enough
diversity locally to do any. And so we may be trapped here. It may be that whatever Einstein
figured out, more or less, is unhackable. And that even when you move from effective theories
to ultimate theories, it can be that there's nothing new to do. But right now, between 1952
and 1954, you put the world on notice that we're going to blow ourselves up unless we have a
wisdom explosion, which doesn't look like it. We got to get off this rock. And you've got to stop
hearing that as science fiction or somebody who watched too many Star Wars movies.
It's only going to take one device going off in a mid-level city as a demonstration of prowess
to let people know that you can't always stop something because of the ballistic missile.
You can't detect all of the enriched fissile material. Whatever we're in, theoretical physics
changed the game with the hydrogen devices of the early 50s. And we are now in the adaptive
valley and we're going to die here as a species. If we do not get out, the only group of people who
can get us out are either the people who would upload us into silicon and forgive me, that sounds
completely ridiculous to me, or the people who could find out whether or not when we pass from
effective Einsteinian theory to ultimate theory, we are in fact limited. So to determine that,
right, so I wanted to bring this up actually in a series of rapid fire questions at the end,
where I'm just going to ask you to say yes or no if you have greater than 50% credulity and
various items. You're asking a non-physicist. No, I know that, Eric, but you're a thinker and you
know very much about risk and you know you're very well schooled in Bayesian reasoning and I think
I'm just an internet personality. And podcaster, noted podcaster. So you look at the Drake equation
and it was born right after, you know, World War II in 1961. You know, Frank Drake came up with this
famous theory and actually most of the terms in that equation, it's not really an equation that
would satisfy any mathematician of note, nor does it ever come along with concomitant error
bars, error analyses, it's always just multiply these fractions together and you'll get a likelihood.
But the one uncertainty that we haven't revealed, in other words, we know star formation rates of
galaxies, we know the number of stars that have habitable zone like planets, we don't know L,
the lifetime. And it sounds to me, and we had a conversation about this last week offline,
you know, that you are actually very deeply, it's not, it's not just, you know, kind of a headline,
you know, grabbing thing that you are very concerned. I don't know if you're a member of the,
you know, atomic bulletin, whatever this union of atomic scientists, bulletin of atomic scientists,
or if it's respectable, I'm not part of it. You would never join such a such a group. No,
no, no, I would never be asked. I see. Okay. This one's run by your friend Lawrence Kraus. So I
wonder if it could be. I've never met Lawrence Kraus. Okay. So, so in the Drake equation, the
letter L stands for the longevity, lifetime of a civilization. Do you really believe that,
that we might be in our final hour, you know, 30 seconds to midnight as this clock is being set
currently? I'd be astounded if we don't do anything clever that we make it 300 years.
Wow. So your approach, and we briefly touched upon this, but I want to delve into it,
does geometric unity offer a potential avenue to, you know, break the speed limit to, to
transgress C as a fundamental limitation? If so, it'll be very interesting to Stephen Wolfram,
because he's claiming in his competing, you know, approach to find a fundamental theory.
He has a competing approach. Well, I'm saying his, his theory of the fundamental physics project
is, is that the speed of light emerges from what he calls branching space, which I take to be
essentially a Hilbert space like object that can subdivide a certain rate. And because of that
limitation and the propagation of these networks, nodes, et cetera, in branching space, the speed
of branch, again, I'm summarizing it, you can watch my interview with him or watch one of his many
well produced and, and, and delightful interviews. But on the other hand, he believes that he can
predict it. It's actually a retro addictive. So wouldn't that stand in contradistinction to any hope
to, to actually find that C is, is just a milestone, if you will, a speed limit that is not truly
fundamental? Yeah, I don't understand the question. Well, a geometric unity, can it, can, can the speed
of light ultimately be derived as a prediction from geometric unity? Or are you, are we sort of
hoping that it might have a, it might not be the fundamental limit? I mean, you're, you seem, you
know, we're worried about the lifetime of civilization, and we want to get far away,
farther away than Saturn, right? Yeah. Would you permit me to rephrase the question slightly?
Please. Yeah. Whether it works. So first part of it is,
people tend to feel better if they can link you to something like, Oh, well, your Peter Teal's
employee, or, Oh, will you and Stephen Wolfram have this rival? None of this is right. I'm,
I'm super glad that Stephen Wolfram is doing whatever Stephen Wolfram is doing. It has almost
nothing to do with anything. I know it doesn't. Okay. So just to be clear. I think what your
question should be is, first of all, how is Einsteinian space time recovered from within
your theory, given that Newton, for example, had to be recovered from Einstein in low velocity
situation? The question would be given the fact that you're not, because, you see, whenever I say
something about getting off this rock, people map that, Oh, faster than light. And that assumes
that you're still staying in the space time paradigm. Right. X four. The idea is that somehow
you've broken the speed limit in the four dimensions with metric. In essence, the claim is,
is that Einstein fill laid the metric bundle. In other words, one way of looking at Einstein's
theory in a modern context would be that he took four degrees of freedom. He built the metric bundle
on top of that, which would be a point wise bundle of fibers of dimension 10. Because if you take
four degrees of freedom, and you take four squared plus four divided by two, that 16 plus four is
20 divided by two is 10. You get 10 degrees of freedom, which is why Einstein's field equations
occur in sort of 10 coupled differential equations. Now, that object is only relevant for the
particular space time metric that Einstein uses to endow the four degrees of freedom
with this extra structure to create space time. What if that's the big error, that in fact,
you should be having the fields mostly propagate on the 14 dimensional space, which would be the
four degrees of freedom plus the 10 degrees of rulers and protractors otherwise known as symmetric
non degenerate two tensors. Then the idea is that a particular choice of Einsteinian metric is a
section of that bundle that section can be used to pull back information from the 14 dimensions
down to the four dimension. Then you have this interesting thing, which is maybe not all the
fields live on the 14. Maybe some are native to the four, some are native to the 14, but they all
appear to be pulled back on the four so that we constantly live in Plato's cave where we can't see
the 14. We sort of know that this 10 is out there because then in this 10 would sort of be the same
10 as the spin 10 theory that contains the SU5 grand unified theory, or more correctly my guess is
is that it lines up with the Petit Salam theory, which is a theory based on the group SU4
cross SU2 cross SU2. Now SU4 by low dimensional isomorphisms is oddly spin six, whereas SU2
cross SU2 is another name for spin four. So spin six cross spin four, four plus 10 is 10 again,
and so you get back to this magical number of 10, and I don't think that I've seen that much
identifying these 10 dimensions that are hidden in the Petit Salam somewhat more explicit in what
you guys call SO10, which you should call spin 10, but I don't want to quibble over terminology,
that's just logomaki. And then you have this issue where that actually has geometric and dynamic
significance, and what we're looking at is kind of the restriction of these fields to a filament,
confusing fields that are native to the four with needed fields that are native to the induced 14
dimensional structure. So that's how Einstein fits in to the observers in the most geometric
unity is broader than this. It doesn't have to use the metric bundle, but in the most aggressive
version of geometric unity, that 10 appears twice. And I don't know that that connection has been
much remarkable. No, I don't think it has. Is it true that you basically would have only fermion-like
particles, in other words, spin intrinsically spinorial operators or spinners that would then
compose both the particles and massive particles and also their mediators?
No. No, no, no. You would have, see, one of the key problems which I can't seem to get any
physicists to care about is that when you have everybody scurrying around saying that they
want to quantize gravity, which is sort of weird, it's a weird replacement, right? We used to want
unified field theories, and then somebody subtly said, oh, the Holy Grail is quantizing gravity.
An incredible sleight of hand. I find greatest taste. If you want to quantize gravity,
my key question to you is always about the electron as opposed to the photon. The photon
is a spin one particle would be a perturbation in a bundle that will exist whether or not a metric
is chosen. So if you imagine that you have a period of time when there is no metric between
observations, whatever that means, the ocean in which the photon is a wave still is well defined,
but the wave may not be known. What happens when you don't have a metric and you look at the electron
ocean? Well, then there's no ocean. In other words, there's a different feature with fractional spin,
which you're going to call fermions or matter as well, which is that finite dimensional matter is
not defined for what would be called gl4r double cover. So you have a flabby symmetry group,
and you only get the ocean of electrons once you take the flab out of it and make it rigid.
So if you want to quantize gravity, I always want to know, I understand sort of what you
might need in a world of photons only, but if there are fermions in your world, I have no idea
what you're talking about when you want to quantize gravity between observations because
it's one thing not to know where the waves are. It's another thing to misplace the Pacific between
every, you know, every moment that you don't have rulers in protract. This is a big problem,
and one of the things geometric unity does is it finds a spinner bundle that does not depend on
metric. It just can't have a four-dimensional space. It's forced into the 14, and it's not the
honest spinner bundle that you associate with the tangent bundle. It's very closely related,
something called the chimeric tangent bundle, which leads to chimeric spinners.
Upstairs in the 14-dimensional world, you're interested in both bosons and fermions. In
fact, you're just in something like the supergroup structure, and that object upstairs
pulls back to what we seem to perceive. As far as I'm concerned, I think we're having a 14-dimensional
conversation. Usually accused of being one-dimensional, not more. I think we're having
a 14-dimensional conversation, and we're taking a four-dimensional filament of it,
and maybe that's what Sean Carroll is talking about when he's going on, about how he believes
wholeheartedly in the multiverse. 50% of them anyway, 50% of them he doesn't. I don't know,
but I just think that in general, what happened is that around the time the unified field theory
gave way to quantizing gravity, nobody noticed the slight hand. Nobody noticed the real conceptual
problems, and that you've got generations of people repeating what their more recent ancestors
said that would have shocked, I think, a lot of the guys who actually built this stuff in the early
20th century. So you've mentioned, are we off of this topic for now, Eric? Or you want to?
I don't know. I mean, it's your podcast. If you want to talk about physics.
Yeah, I'd like to talk physics. I'd like to talk about, because again, I use
simple-minded. I like to treat everything like a nail, and my hammer is looking at things through
experimental lenses. Before we do that, we briefly touched on Popper, and we briefly touched on
Girdle, and I had this conversation with Stephen Wolfram, and I've had it with other thinkers
ranging from Freeman Dyson to Roger Penrose and Jim Gates, and I'd like to know your take on this.
I believe that physicists are suffering from math envy and Freudian language
replacing certain protuberance with the word math, and that's in a sense that Girdle at least
showed them the limits of what was possible in mathematics or impossible, the so-called
incompleteness theorem. And for decades, or maybe not, it's been taken as sort of sacrosanct at a
level, which I believe is unearned, that Popper provided an analog for physicists, for ways to
determine the credulity one should have in a physical theory, and that was whether or not it
could be falsified. And falsification has come to mean not just evidence or evidence against,
but even the ability to retro-dict certain things that are known to be subsumed within the theoretical
or physical theory. I'm wondering, do you believe in Popper's dialectic, or do you believe in his
demarcation claim, or is there something superior in your mind that could replace it? And then,
obviously, I want to turn that to geometric unity. So first, what do you think about the Girdle,
Popper distinction that I'm making here? These are these beautiful hopes that we're going to be
able to codify what science is and what science isn't. I think it's important that we say why
we're animated by this. Trying to get rid of cranks and losers and freaks and weirdos distract us
and figure out what the magic formula is that we can do science by so that we can say, look,
we're an open community. We welcome everyone who wants to try to pull the sword out of the stone.
And in fact, you guys broke the rules, so you guys don't get to try anymore. And the people
who are playing by the rules, good kids and the other ones get a lump in their stock.
So that's what our motivation is, because frankly, we don't want a huge line of
incompetence trying their hand. It takes days to debunk somebody who's filled with bunk,
and there's always 12 more behind that person. So I think it's really much better to talk about
the political economy of this and talk about the opportunity cost of debunking people. It's very
expensive to talk about it. What I find ridiculous is when people treat somebody like me like that,
because they're looking for a demarcation solution, which is, it's just very silly,
but the locals sometimes want to play that game. In general, I haven't found that many people want
to play with me, but let's keep going. I think that we're in some very different place with
Popper. And what I've said before is that the scientific method is actually the radio
edit of great science. And I mean something very particular by that. Great science is whatever
people have done to make major advances, and then whatever people might do to make major advances.
And I remember hanging out with Jim Watson, where he more or less said that Rosalind Franklin was a
much better scientist than he was. But his point was that we were great scientists and she was very,
very good. And we were not very, very good. Not just that great is better than good. It's two
different styles. You want to look at a really revolutionary essay he wrote, something like
succeeding in science rules of thumb or something like that. The style of great science is in general
indefensible. If you looked at, in my opinion, sort of the three great names of 20th century
physics, and I'm going to come up with a list that other people aren't going to love,
they're going to agree with me on Einstein and Dirac. And then weirdly, Frank Yang, C. N. Yang,
gets left off because people want to say Weinberg, Feynman, something like that.
I find that very weird. I think Yang is way up there. But those guys are the ones with their
names on the laws of nature. And if you look at what they say, they're all talking about beauty.
So they're not withstanding. But the problem is, have beauty as a method. There is the beauty
method in science. And it almost never works, except for our very best people. So if you go
to look right at the top of theoretical physics, everyone's talking about beauty, but it's like
three guys. And what do you do with a method that's a little bit like
what was it? The Blackbird aircraft that almost no one can fly, but it's the highest performance
airplane in the sky. Well, that's what the beauty method is. It's not about popper,
it's not about falsifications, but intuition, it's about guts, it's about
all the things that you want to tell if you're an average person, do not use this. It will
cause you to crash into the rocks. So trying to give advice for good science and advice for
great science is very frustrating because it's not the same thing. In general, great science
looks like bad science that happens to work. And well, it's like, okay, Kikuli is thinking about
a snake eating itself, and it turns out to be benzene. How are you going to recommend people
do that? There's an old joke or something about that, we don't use the Feynman method in this
class. What's the Feynman method? You look at the problem, you think you're hard, you're right down
the answer. We have to recognize that in general, there isn't a scientific method.
There's something that we can clean up and show to try to say that what we're doing is defensible
and that we're not talking mumbo jumbo, but I'm going to tell you the horrible dirty secret at
the bottom of all of this. It's about taste and everyone knows it. Whether or not you give,
you know, who was it? I guess it was Murray Gelman who gave Schwartz a job at Caltech because
he had the sense that this guy's working on something important. Whether I'm a string theory
booster or not is not really the important point. You know, Schwartz Gelman was right.
And you have this problem that at the bottom of all of this is not something that is sanitized
that can be cleaned up to show your parents. This is a terrifying, marginal, bizarre activity.
And this is part of why you get people who are so angry about people breaking the rules,
because honestly, those aren't the rules. Peer review has not been long in our world.
This is about personal communications. If you look at what happened with Freeman Dyson,
trying to defend Feynman to Oppenheimer and having to call in Beta. And then, you know,
Oppenheimer puts this note in his inbox, no low contendry, and the guy had a job at the Institute
for Advanced Study with no PhD and neither math or physics for the rest of his life.
This is how bad asses get shit done, is that it's about knowing people so intimately and trusting
people so intimately and having enough resources that you can run something like the RNA Tie Club
and share early results knowing that everybody's good enough to get their own goddamn Nobel Prize.
And if they don't get Nobel Prize, everybody knows who's good anyway. We don't really need
this internally. Nobody's confused about Stuckelberg outside of the, you know, inside the community.
We all know that he was super important. He got shafted. So it's very important to recognize
this is a small intimate activity of weirdos, freaks, madmen. It's a circus. And the adorable
focus on the demarcation problem that comes from history and sociology of science programs
is very touching and sweet, but they should get the hell out of our fields and let us get down to
work and do what we do best, which is breaking rules and doing anything that's been known ever
to come to an end. But of course, there's the, you know, greater possible abstract space of
possibly true theories or possibly true laws of nature than actually true. And I think what you
care about, you know, Einstein famously said imagination is more important than knowledge.
But as I said, I was talking to Sasha Sagan, Carl Sagan's daughter yesterday on the podcast.
And, you know, here's her father's doll of her father. And, and we're, I was saying, you know,
imagination is great. And it's wonderful to have it. And we should cultivate it. Obviously,
Arthur C. Clarke Center for Human Imagination. But I don't want my neurosurgeon, God forbid,
you know, to be like, I'm going to be really creative, you know, and curious about, you know,
Brian's brain surgery, God forbid, you know, I want him to have a lot of knowledge or her to
have a lot of knowledge. And in the case of, you know, these theories, who decides that's wrong?
Well, you, so you would like to have a creative approach to, you know, things that have a true
yes or no, I'm arguing Dirac wouldn't have been Dirac. He said, it's more important your equations
be beautiful than that they be right or something to that effect.
More important to have beauty in one's equations than that they fit experiment.
Yeah. And so it sounds like you agree with that. And I'm saying the ultimate, Dirac didn't become
Dirac until we discovered the truth of his, of the Dirac equation of the existence of,
which he was wrong about originally identifying the positive. I mean, I'm not faulting him.
Obviously, he went on to a good career, despite what Brian Keating might think about it. But,
the point is, it is the arbiter. I might be arguing my own book, but, but I'm arguing that
we need experiment to, to validate it. And maybe that's the ultimate gatekeeper in your language.
Okay. So, so explain this. This is the problem that we're weak. And this is physics bowing down
to history and sociology of science. The key point was, why did Einstein know what he was doing
when Einstein and Grossman appeared, I think in 1913, which is vaguely said,
the answer is something like a linear expression in the Riemann curvature tensor equal to the
stress energy, not specifying what it was. Then he gets it wrong. And he says it's the
Ricci tensor distilled. And that was shown not to be, what's the operator you guys call it,
perpendicular to the orbits, co-variantly, not co-variantly constant, but divergence free.
Maybe you call it divergence free. So then he puts in the one half scalar curvature correction
to that. And that's not enough because of Hubble. So then you put in the cosmological
and then Hilbert finds, okay, your super complicated equation is actually the simplest
Euler Lagrange equation that comes from the simplest action. You know, it's like, okay, well,
how did he know ahead of time that he was on the right path? He kept correcting it. And then
this whole thing about the electron versus the positron. Now, Dirac wasn't wrong. He was
insufficiently courageous. And, you know, this is exactly where I'm going through, which is like,
when you have detractors, you're constantly trying to placate your detractors. Oh, no, no,
I didn't say that. I didn't mean that. Oh, please, please. I mean, it's just stupid. The issue is,
if you'd let him say, okay, yeah, I don't have the answer for that. If you stop pushing for
agreement, stop pushing for immediate agreement with experiment. I mean, this is the difference
between authors and copy editors. The copy editors have taken over at some levels. You've got the
lunatics promoting the string theoretic agenda, which has completely failed that they can't be in,
they can't be honest about. And then you've got the copy editors, which is like, you didn't say
Simon says, it's like, shut up enough. It's something in between. It's a very fine sensibility.
And it has to do with a tiny number of people. The thing is intrinsically elitist,
is what you're using before you get to the ability to agree with the experiment.
Is the question that in the end, it has to agree with the experiment? Of course.
But like, that's some super late stage thing. And again,
Oh, yeah.
It's a problem of privileging the tailor as if the tailor made the suit.
But I got to agree with the experiment. He put the last dot on the last eye.
Really? I mean, are you that soulless that you can't actually recognize that
Hilbert was not in a race with Einstein?
I think if you look at it and you see, you know, you see the prestige levels, and I'm not, you know,
one for going through the sociology of science any more than I believe you are, but you look at
the prestige afforded to physicists. And, you know, it goes, it goes, as you said, it'll go,
you know, Einstein in this last, you know, 150 years, you know, Bohr, it'll go to Feynman, it'll
go, if it makes it to someone who did an experiment, it'll be Fermi. And, you know, we can argue and
debate it whether or not he was. So I think you're certainly right. The prestige goes to it. And I
think I can't shut up about Madam Wu.
Yeah. Right. You look at that. And then you look at many of the great discoveries by quote,
unquote, experimentalists or non theorists and, you know, resulting in Nobel prizes or other
metrics. Pick your favorite one. You know, our first serendipitous discoveries that we, you know,
maybe even the theorists had discounted. But, but it's usually not, I think Dickey is an exception,
because I think he was equally, you know, facile with with his theory. And he was a top notch
experimentalist. He's kind of my hero in that sense. And he harkens back to the Galileo model.
But, you know, that being said, if there were ways to channel, to test GU, I mean, could, could we
speculate as to what they are? Because I think, I think, Eric, there are ways to test it. I mean,
you are talking about certain things in your, in your lecture.
I'm not trying to avoid that, Brian.
Yeah. No, I know you are.
What I'm trying to avoid is, is that I'm trying to avoid the deep...
infant mortality, the infant mortality that would come from, oh, this is not worth pursuing,
because he's not putting it in a journal and requiring an experiment. I know that's a high bar.
No, it's not that. It's just, I'm sickened by watching a noble family forget its role in the
world. Right? Like, you know, it's the arrogance without the accomplishment. You guys haven't figured
out, you have to tell the interlopers from outside. You know, this is something, it's
an elitist activity. Like, as much as I hate to say it, the top three guys in the 20th century
were just different. They were, they were using different methods. I might even in group Feynman,
and I might talk about Stuckelberg, which people aren't going to necessarily want to hear about.
You can't, it's not egalitarian. It's, it's not fair. It's not a fair subject. And if you want,
well, tell me, tell me what science is and what, what it isn't so that I can apply the rule. It's
like, okay, when you're up at, when you're up this high above the tree line, the world works
differently. And nobody, there's no reason that an ape should be able to do these things. It's
a huge surprise that this is even possible. With that said, my frustration is that this
noble family has fallen into so much poverty that it can't behave properly scientifically.
And my story about Oppenheimer and Dyson was that maybe, maybe Dyson did need Beta to come in and
say, Hey, pay attention to the kid. He's got, he's got it going on. But it got done. It worked out.
People did not lose their livelihoods, their jobs. They didn't need PhDs. It's like, we knew who
was good and who wasn't. We gave them time. We gave them space. And so you're coming after me.
Huh, the joke's on you. I'm not even, I mean, I'm using none of your resources at all. What are
you going to do? Cut off my oxygen? You can't. Absolutely can't. You can cut off my internet.
Yeah, but you want to get back to testing. The key point is, imagine people came to say,
instead of, Hey, how do we get rid of you? They said, we're really interested.
What do you think you might be telling us? We know you're not a physicist. We know that you're
working at a geometric level. We know that it needs to be quantized. We know that you don't
understand exactly how we calculate and quantum field theory. Marcus, you're terrible pedagogues.
Um, what could we do constructively? I'd be all over that. Well, I've got some suggestions. Say,
let me just say something. Yeah, go ahead. Brian Keating, Professor Brian Keating is unusual
in that he's been after me for years to come to UC San Diego and lecture, which is very courageous.
So I don't know if I'm courageous, but I know, sir, that you are. I want you to be
a visiting scholar here, actually, which it would be an absolute honor, be an absolute honor.
What I would say is a bunch of new particles that I can read off their properties
relative to the internal symmetry groups. So we've got weak hypercharge. We guys have been
strong internal quantum numbers. There are a huge number of new particles that are predicted in
this theory to exist. Now, the instant I say the word prediction, I get into a different thing.
First of all, what, what energy level would we have seen them? You know, where, where, where would
they be in the, in the, in the, in the, in the Swiss and the decay rates, blah, blah, blah.
And it's like, okay, so that's that energy of whatever. I don't know how to do all that stuff.
I can tell you that if it was somebody else coming up with this theory, they'd say, oh,
well, we would think that we should have seen them. That would be like
Dirac saying the antiparticle of the electron must be the proton because I don't know of a
positively charged particle of the electron because the positron hadn't been found by Anderson.
Stupid Dirac. Yeah. Stupid Dirac. Right. But like, if you pressure me, I don't know,
and I'll make the same mistake Dirac makes, and then you can have your Heisenberg come out and
say, oh, Eric didn't know about this. Let's leave that energy aside. Yeah. If it was somebody inside
of the community, they might say, look, I've got something that fits almost everything,
and it's off a little bit over here. Let's tailor it together.
Well, that would be an invitation to a conversation. What could we do? Is there
a new field that we might introduce to suppress it? Maybe this is actually naturally occurring.
Same point about Dirac and Schroeder. You know, maybe, oh, you didn't take into account this
aspect of spin. What can I tell you about the theory? First of all, I don't think that what you
guys call antimatter is antimatter. I think there's an entirely different sector that would
properly be understood as antimatter. I think there's a 14-dimensional space. You guys are
applying these things all in dimension four. I think that there's spin three halves matter that
is actually real. I don't think that one of the three generations is a true generation. I believe
that if you amp it up in terms of energy, it will unify with other particles you've never seen.
I believe that probably in gravitationally weak places, what we see is a decoupling of equations,
but the near black holes, you might very well see the things that have been decoupled become
coupled, and therefore a lot of stuff might come surging into view, and so that what was dark might
become light. I mean, there's any one of a number of things that you can read off.
I don't think that I've had a single, friendly, competent inquiry in a month
since I released it. Well, yeah, I've been thinking about it since you released it,
and we made contact last week. I want to talk to you about, well, first of all,
I want to talk to you about something you kind of made as an offhand comment in your April Fool's
Day podcast, and I'm sorry to keep calling it that. It's just easier for me to remember.
Oh, that's what I tried to do. I wanted, if this works, let's imagine, just dream with me.
Yeah, yeah.
Soon that it works.
Yep.
Published on April Fool's Day.
Right. And every year, all the pent-up energy of all of these communities would,
you'd be able to air these things without losing your job. Oh, this is the Weinstein tradition.
Like, you want to talk about honoring me. Imagine that every year we could say things like,
I wonder if stress doesn't cause ulcers. I wonder if grains should be at the base of the food pyramid.
I wonder whether or not the Yamabi problem solution in the literature really works.
I wonder if the weak force might be asymmetric.
You know, how many things have we been afraid to say? Like, with COVID, I'm positively convinced
that there are doctors who are looking at this saying, no, make no dissent, so this doesn't
make sense. It doesn't work. Something is weirdly off. The danger, the danger of this is that people
are holding back for fear of being drummed out of their fields. So the whole point of releasing
on April 1st is my fantasy would be if this were to work, not only getting humans off this planet,
but making sure two things. One, that an H index of zero became a respectable thing, saying,
I choose not to avail myself of your insane community and its bizarre rituals because you're
knarks and you're trying to fight the cranks, but lots of us are neither knark nor crank.
And every year, I want you to know that you have a day where you're free. Yeah.
The same thing. Like, I think David Gross is not leading the theoretical physics community
properly and is brilliant as Ed Whitman. I think he's contributing and not lose your job.
Yeah, I kind of see it as a, what's that movie where they have like one day of the year they
can commit any crime. But as another listeners are screaming, I mean, I'll put it in the show
notes, people, don't worry. But there's a, and then unavoidably, if you are, it'll be essential
to quote that it was released on April Fool's Day. So I think it's a brilliant piece of intentional
or unintentional. It was recorded on April Fool's Day, I released, missed by a few minutes. I know,
I know, but I'm just going to keep calling it that. Anyway, in your, in your, in the podcast,
you talk about, you know, one of the great moments of, of relief for you, at least at some point,
when you discovered that, you know, your theory wouldn't work if neutrinos were massless,
but it did work because we know that they have masses. We don't know what their masses are.
And I wonder if you are aware, you probably are, but, but it's not absolutely known that the,
that all three neutrino species have mass. In other words, there's only known to be a mass
difference, a mass squared difference to be technical between two, you know, the two different
eigen, eigenstates. But we don't know, actually, one of them could be massless. Would that,
in some way, false, if we discover that one species is massless, you know, mu one or something
like that, one flavor, then would that, would that be a falsification opportunity for the
popper? What it really needs is it needs, if you think about the SU five theory, let's say,
grand unified theory, there's like a five and an anti representation, you can put in an inactive
singlet. But the important thing is, is that it'd be 16 particles in a generation. And so the issue
that I was having, it wasn't even necessarily the case that it wasn't, that there weren't 16
particles. But people were still very much trying to be conservative and saying, well, why don't
hypothesize, if you have, what is it, a right handed neutral, you know, then it's effectively dark.
And so the key issue is just that there'd be a spinorial representation, not really about mass.
So it's easier to say it in terms of masses and neutrinos, but I'm not trying to hide anything.
So I'm just, I'll say the more, the more correct version is, it has to come from a 16
dimensional representation, or rather a spinorial representation to the end, or
you can do it more broadly with the Rarita Schwinger, but it's a very restricted class of it.
So that would not be, you know, if we, her cosmological experiments like Simon's observatory
and bicep, et cetera, are trying to, you know, in some level constrain the mass and neutrino,
the sum of the mass of neutrinos. And then that combined with reactor experiments might actually
reveal the absolute masses instead of just the sum of their squares and square rooted, so to speak.
I'm getting questions from a listener who wants me to ask you, is a distinguished professor at
Brown University, and he's asking me to ask you in real time.
Does he play the saxophone?
He does play the saxophone. He does. He's also the president of the National Society of Black
Physicists, which I am a proud honorary member of. And yes, it is Stefan Alexander,
best friend and best man at my wedding. And Stefan's asking in real time, what is your
theory? You have to say about the cosmological constant problem or about dark matter. We've
sort of hit on antimatter. Tell us, answer Stefan's question about the cosmological constant
and or dark matter.
So first of all, I would say that the cosmological constant would not be a constant. It would be
a VEV. I mean, look, I'm going to try to speak physics and hang.
Yeah, please do. Yeah.
But if I screw up.
It's okay. You get a pass.
Don't try this at home, kids.
You could put on the mathematician hat if you make a mistake.
Well, we don't talk like this. I would say that it's a VEV and the VEV is lured away from zero
because there is a curvature piece that is pervasive that as the universe is spread out.
Got to keep talking like this as the cross section three dimensional space like cross
section is spread out that VEV has gotten very low. But it's still non zero and that the
look, let me just say it this way that that you're luring something away from zero potentially
because you've got a topological contribution. And if you have some sort of
Gauss-Penet theorem, then you have to be able to recover the topology from the curvature.
So you could have a reason that you couldn't get rid of the curvature, but you could spread it out.
And therefore you have counterbalance in Germany with respect to dark matter.
There's a lot of it.
Part this is the decoupling. So the claim is that the matter wasn't dark originally
in high gravitational situation, but it became dark. And as the VEV went down and effectively
a coupled equation broke into effectively decoupled equation. And the decoupled equations
would have things like dark light, dark glons, axions. So there's a ton of
there's a ton to be speculated and you don't know that it broke the way your half broke.
So if you iron sort of one half of the stuff. And again, when I say half, I don't
there's stuff that we haven't found in our half in this theory, stuff that is decoupled.
So, so there's like, it's more than half would be dark. But you might be able to say, look,
I don't know exactly how that the other part broke. But what I would say is,
you know that how it would unify. The example I just give to people who are watching
is if you have a hand, you see three fingers, two and four, your digits two and four pretty
symmetric and the middle finger is symmetric. But you could say, Oh, I wonder if there's a
symmetry there where my index and my ring finger are mirror images of each other.
And then you throw in these two and you say, Oh, shoot, well, maybe it's spontaneously broken.
And, you know, these things are like, weirdly often, maybe my thumb and my pinky are more or
less the same. And then you find out, Oh my God, it's thumb to thumb, not thumb to pinky.
And this stuff is dark because it's decoupled. And so this is all remaining to be found.
And this is where the proper anti matter would be. But because you're not even aware of the 14
dimensional substrate, you're thinking about everything in four dimensional terms, which
is after it's been pulled back. And so if we're done with that thread particular answer, because
I've asked Stefan, he's the man. All right. Well, he's not listening live. Unfortunately,
we should, we should have called them in, but I think we'll do that. Brother Stefan,
how could you do this? I know he's just, we're just texting back and forth sharing pictures of
our daughters. Today is his daughter's birthday. 12th birthday or something, right?
That's right. Yeah, I wish her a happy birthday from you. I want to stick with mysterious particles
and ask you if they've maybe already been found. I want to quote from an article in
not the most, you know, necessarily prestigious scientific journal, but Scientific American,
no less. It's not a peer reviewed journal, but it's a discussion of mysterious particles
lurking underground. And this is underground, the, the great icy continent that I've been to
a couple of times called Antarctica, in particular, two experiments that seem to show some concordance
and at least in the middle, this is Anita and ice cube. So ice cube, I think it'll be interesting
for you to talk to an ice actual ice cube scientist and an Anita scientist, but they claim
that the particles that they're finding, they don't have much understanding. And technically,
this is two particles, two events, but extremely high significance statistically speaking.
We call 5.8 sigma and seven sigma. So these are, you know, chances of fluke occurrence to that
the hundred thousand to million, one in a million level. And if those are possible, certainly,
you know, not seeing them, it would be like the magnetic monopole problem, which was claimed,
again, on a special date on a holiday to be discovered at Stanford Blaschke-Barrows group,
the Valentine's Day event, where he claimed back in 1987, I believe that he detected the
magnetic monopole in our universe. And that was later, later had to be reanalyzed and at least
to claim it wasn't a blunder. It was just not as significant. I think Gillian Maxwell has the
other one. Yes, that's right. They're, they're sneaking around trading between different places
on planet Earth. But what do you make about these particles? Is there a way to, I mean,
so here's an opportunity, geometric unity, you know, can we say how would these fit in
to the geometric unity framework? Invite me to a physics department. I will. You already have
an invitation. So we have not, yeah. But this is the issue, which is that I'm, I live so far off
of your grid that I'm not going to seminars. I'm not discussing the stuff with people.
So I don't really know how to answer that, but I can show you what the representations are,
what the equations are, what the Lagrangians are. And, you know, in large measure, what holds me up
from just sort of saying is this issue about the tailoring, which is I don't want to get
into a war about the tailoring. Well, you said it's this and actually you forgot a factor of,
you know, I over two, no, but, but I've played with these guys before and I can't
end it. I don't think you have. I actually have to challenge you there. I don't, I think you're
painting all physicists, including my brethren and sister in experimental physics with the same
brush that may or may not be justified. Okay. So, so great. So what I would like is I would
like a full-throated acknowledgement of work in economics and gauge theory from Mr. Juan Maldesena.
It would be my pleasure because I'm a huge fan of wands and I'm not a detractor of wands.
That held up as the credit that should have gone to myself and Pia Malani and your wife.
Yes, I know that, but I have no control over that. What I do have control over.
No, I understand that. I'm just trying to say you want to talk about the, you know, when I submitted
certain work at Harvard, which was peculiar to dimension eight, one of the things was, well,
if you can't solve this in the Arctonionic Projected Plane, then it's nothing. And well,
the Arctonionic Projected Plane is dimension 16. So I've played various games of Gotcha and Simon
says, and what you're looking at is somebody who is mature, but also is traumatized and traumatized
specifically by the nonsense of these games. So I would love to participate. I would love to play,
but in part what it means is I will not be playing the game. Like, you know, people always love to
say, Hilberg, you know, and Einstein weren't a race for the equation. They were not. If Einstein
and Grossman's first paper was all that we had and he never put anything else in it, it would still
be general relativity due to Einstein and Grossman. So I'm going to push back on your pushback and I'm
saying, no, the field really has a problem with credit and attribution. That was 116 years ago,
but I will say it's gotten worse since then. In a theory, I can't speak to that. I agree with you
in principle because I have seen nastiness. Maybe it's unique to UC San Diego, which has produced
such luminaries as your enemy, Dr. Garrett Leasy. He's not my enemy. He's my arch nemesis.
Arch nemesis. Sorry. We love Garrett here and he's a good friend, hopefully come on the podcast soon
as well. But I want to talk about, you know, this notion. There is a difference between
Let me just get back to it. It would be a great pleasure to see, to have the Anita experiments
translated from an experimental finding having to do with things apparently coming through the
surface of the earth, yada, yada, yada into bundle geometric language. And I can come some of the
way towards experimental, but, you know, I don't know, maybe that requires me being somewhere
for a week in constant dialogue. And I don't think I've done that since I've been at the
Perimeter Institute, you know, I know almost a decade ago. Oh yeah, we're a 90 minute, you know,
train ride away. So, but let me say this, I had a conversation with none other than Sir Roger Penrose
who's been on your podcast and I take it as somewhat of an inspiration to you as he is to me.
And he sat down and he told me, I believe that your bicep results were correct that you did
detect b-modes. And they just weren't from inflation, you know, he has a theory called the
conformal cyclic cosmological model that features an inflationless, you know, aeon system of aeon
cycling back and forth between different eras aeons as he calls them. And he pointed out evidence
being, you know, these so-called hawking points that he claims were discovered in our maps. And
he pointed to the images that we produced and the publication held the great fanfare in 2014.
And I stopped them and I said, Roger, those are basically, you know, PR shots. Those are,
those have zero scientific content within them. Anything that you find in it, what I would take
to be almost a falsification of your theory that these exist because these are highly processed.
And none of the details, it's just basically like a sketch. Like if I, if I released an artist's
sketch of a criminal, it's no more or less, you know, credible than the, you know, than,
than, you know, basically a computer generated image. It's just publicity. And he said to me,
these wonderful, you know, words basically like, Oh, well, then I have to reevaluate that. But I,
you know, could it be possible that this other element magnetic fields survive, not the black
holes? And, and so it launched a wonderful discussion. And, and he's, you know, 82 year old
guy and he wants to come here and he, and he is coming here on an annual basis. And we talk about
this and he's open to, and he's done an experimentalist. And I don't think he's in the orthodoxy,
although he's at a level of renown that you have to take him seriously. And, and so again,
I just want to say don't tar and feather all physicists because I think there is something.
Obviously, you know, I'm friends with Stefan. Yeah. I've spoken very highly of Juan of
Ed Whitton, Ed Whitton, Nima Arkani, Hamed, David Kaplan, the University of Maryland.
That's not what the problem. The problem has to do with when something goes wrong.
There's this sort of like, Oh yeah, yeah, that happens all the time happened to me when I was
a young guy. Like, there's such a lot, it's like being in Nigeria talking about corruption.
Love people and like people, but it's endemic to the field and it has to do with
there not being enough resources and not enough success. And my standards are
very different. Like, you know, if you imagine that you're a hot chick in an office in the 1950s,
you know, and you're getting patted on your, on your ass when you walk down the hallways,
and you try to imagine a modern woman having a reaction to that kind of a culture. Yes,
there are all sorts of things that are normal and supposedly good people for engaging them because
the norms are all shifted. Well, in a world in which nobody's really apologized for string
theory, except for maybe Dan Friedan at an appropriate level and all of the, you know,
things that happened as a result of it. The community is in an unhealthy state. I'm not
tearing all individuals. I'm trying to say that when this is over, we will look back on a lot of
this the way we look back on Jeffrey Chu and the bootstrap. This is a very weird period. And for
some reason, I'm not under its spell. And, you know, people say, well, you know, of course,
everything was very promising in 1984 with the anomaly cancellation. Well, no, it wasn't. It
wasn't then. It wasn't in the 90s with the second string theory. I mean, lots of interesting things
came out of it. But the point is, no, it was always nonsense. It was always crazy. It was always a
madness. And it had to do with the fact that the field hasn't succeeded. And that too many people
have concentrated power and that people who had, you know, how would, how would you go up against
an Ed Whitten and say, actually, even though you're so brilliant, I still think you're wildly off.
And even though you're so accomplished, I think you're incorrect. These issues or David or Joe
Polchinski, if you make the argument that everything is string theory after the fact, well,
can you imagine putting your hard work into something that no matter what you do, they're
going to claim it and they're telling you ahead of time. All of these things have to do with the
need to clean up the field. And I just want it to be very clear that I am both its biggest proponent
and critic. And if you want to think about it as Schrodinger's enthusiast, that's what I am.
Okay, well, good. I know you're super busy, but I can't resist if you'll indulge me.
Because it's so rare I get to chat with you and it's so much fun to talk to.
Brian, I got to tell you, I was thrilled and pleased this punch that you were going to take
neither a booster approach, nor let's throw, let's, let's, let's teach you a lesson approach.
So I want to say that there's not a lot I want to put on a jacket for, but this was important.
Okay, great. Well, I'll, I'll definitely be, be citing that quote on, on repeat to playing it for
my, my children and friends.
Any sufficiently advanced technology is indistinguishable from magic.